# student_performance
student performance - predicting students' test scores based on various socioeconomic, race, and other parameters


# Introduction
It is pivotal to encourage and support worldwide education, especially those of younger generations. There are some challenges that play an subtle but influential role in affecting children's ability to get a good education. Good education can be captured differently but in this analysis, the test scores (math, reading, and writing) will be the quantitative values which will measure children's academic performance. Some factors that influence children's ability to learn in schools could stem from variety of reasons ranging from parents' education level, the family's financial status, ethnicity, and so forth. The purpose of this jupyter notebook is to predict features that can predict what factors could influence students' academic performances.

# Information about the data
This dataset is fictional. This contains each student's performance in Math, Reading, and Writing score. The dataset is fictional and contains the variety of personal, social, and economic factors that may influence the test scores. 

# 4 types of different models
1. random forest
2. linear regression
3. lasso
4. ridge

# Conclusion
This dataset was fictional and this presented a good chance to explore the various socioeconomic, sex, race, and other factors that could influence students' test scores (math, reading, and writing). As a general pattern, the education level of the parents and students' participation in prep classes affected math, writing, and reading scores. The higher the parents' education level and the more students took prep classes, the higher their scores. This makes sense as if parents are well educated, there is more of an emphasis in education and this value is passed throughout the generation. The participation in prep classes increasing scores also make sense as practice and repetition makes perfect. The more people dedicate time on practice, the better they get via 10,000 hours rule, highlighting the importance of good habits and time management. The ability for parents to send their children to prep classes subtly highlights the socioeconomic status as well as parents with additional flexible income to spend can afford such luxuries. Next step was seeing if some features could predict the students' math scores. All the features were used as features for predictions where the categorical columns were one-hot encoded into numerics to feed into the model. Four different types of models were used: random forest, linear regression, lasso, and ridge. The linear regression and ridge had highest accuracy score of around 0.85. The other models came close to 0.80. For linear regressions, the gender being Male, race group E, and participation in test prep had highest impact. The gender playing pivotal part in predicting math test score was a bit disheartening as there have been evidence repeatedly that there is not a significant difference in intelligence between both genders. This suggests that we should do a better job at reducing the gender discrimination at younger age. There has been studies where when females are made aware of their gender before a test, they tend to score significantly lower than if they were not aware, implying that this subtle awareness cna have significant impact on behavior and anxiety to reduce score. Overall this was an interesting analysis and while there are many models, linear regression continues to be a powerful model. There are other, more mysterious models like blackbox but these remain unexplainable and simple is a good way to go for building models when the relationship is linear.
